Improve Startup Latency and 0-RTT (#1544)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

session's lifetime.  Doing so results in the session being closed as a
`PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

### Minimizing Setup Latency

MoQ uses two unidirectional streams for SETUP messages to allow either
endpoint to initiate a MoQ Session.

Bidirectional request streams cannot be processed until the SETUP message
has been processed, but they can be sent.

If a PUBLISH request is sent prior to receiving the peer's SETUP, Objects
associated with the PUBLISH can be sent prior to receiving a PUBLISH_OK
in response, as is always true with PUBLISH.

As such, a client or server can initiate a MoQ session, subscribe, and
start publishing Objects all in parallel.

Prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message, it's unknown what extensions
a peer will support. Message Parameters requiring negotiation SHOULD NOT
be used prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message unless the application
requires the extension or the endpoint knows the peer supports the
extension. If an unsupported Message Parameter is used, the peer will be

> unable to process it and the session will be terminated. See {message-params}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unable to process it and the session will be terminated. See {message-params}.
```

### 0-RTT

QUIC supports 0-RTT ({{Section 2.3 of ?RFC8446}}), but Webtransport over QUIC
is not expected to use 0-RTT, because initializing a WebTransport session
uses CONNECT, which is not a safe method. {{?RFC8470}} describes the use of
0-RTT with HTTP in more detail. If 0-RTT is used with an existing or future
version of WebTransport, the following would apply to it as well as QUIC.

0-RTT is not forward secure, so MoQ users need to consider that when
deciding if 0-RTT is appropriate.

MoQ Messages and Objects as defined in this draft are safe to replay in most
circumstances.

> * TRACK_STATUS gets the Largest Object and Track Properties, but does not

Reviewer: It actually doesn't get Track Properties right now :|

  change the state of a Track or any Object in the Track.
* SUBSCRIBE requests Objects be delivered, but does not change the Objects
  being requested.
* PUBLISH initiates a Subscription and Objects can be immediately sent to
  the Subscriber. Sending the same Objects multiple times does not change

>   the Track contents, because MoQ ignores duplicate Objects.

Author: If you are a Subscriber to two Publishers for the same Track, I believe the current draft says that you ignore whichever arrives second, modulo potential Object properties?

Thoughts on how to say that?

* SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests a list of namespaces and the establishment
  of new subscriptions, but does not change the available Namespaces,
  Tracks, or Objects contained within a Track.

> * PUBLISH_NAMESPACE indicates that Subscriptions should be sent to the

Author: ```suggestion
* PUBLISH_NAMESPACE requests Subscriptions for Tracks in the namespace be sent to that
```

  Publisher. If a Subscription was sent to the replaying endpoint, it
  would fail because the endpoint cannot complete the handshake.

> 

Author: Interesting point.  Spurious PUBLISH_NAMESPACEs could cause churn in the available namespaces?  Though if we're only talking replay, then presumably someone else already published that namespace successfully, so this would just be an extra available Publisher?

Some potential side effects of replay are:

> * The NEW_GROUP_REQUEST Parameter {{new-group-request}} can cause a new

Reviewer: NGR is deduplicated by the value.  A replayed NGR should only reach the OP once?

Author: Good point, removed.

close the Session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`. Objects are sent on unidirectional
streams.

> As such, a client or server can initiate a MoQ session, subscribe, and

Author: ```suggestion
As such, a client or server can initiate a MoQT session, subscribe, and
```

> As such, a client or server can initiate a MoQT session, subscribe, and

Reviewer: server's can't initiate a session?

Also MOQT

Author: ```suggestion
As such, a client can initiate a MOQT session, subscribe, and
```

MOQT Messages and Objects as defined in this draft are safe to replay in most
circumstances.

* TRACK_STATUS gets the Largest Object and Track Properties, but does not
  change the state of a Track or any Object in the Track.
* SUBSCRIBE requests Objects be delivered, but does not change the Objects
  being requested.
* PUBLISH initiates a Subscription. Objects can be immediately sent to
  the Subscriber. Processing the same Objects multiple times is
  idempotent, as the subscriber or relay can identify and discard
  duplicates based on the Group ID and Object ID.
* SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests a list of namespaces and the establishment
  of new subscriptions, but does not change the available Namespaces,
  Tracks, or Objects contained within a Track.
* PUBLISH_NAMESPACE requests that Subscriptions under the namespace be sent
  to that Publisher. If a Subscription was sent to the replaying endpoint, it
  would fail because the endpoint cannot complete the handshake.

Some potential side effects of replay are:

* Publishing Objects that were previously published could cause those
  Objects to be distributed to active Subscriptions if the relays do

>   not identify them as already having been published.

Author: ```suggestion
  not identify them as already having been published. This re-distribution could
  also make them available in cache again after they previously had expired.
```

circumstances.

* TRACK_STATUS gets the Largest Object and Track Properties, but does not
  change the state of a Track or any Object in the Track.
* SUBSCRIBE requests Objects be delivered, but does not change the Objects
  being requested.
* PUBLISH initiates a Subscription. Objects can be immediately sent to
  the Subscriber. Processing the same Objects multiple times is
  idempotent, as the subscriber or relay can identify and discard
  duplicates based on the Group ID and Object ID.
* SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests a list of namespaces and the establishment
  of new subscriptions, but does not change the available Namespaces,
  Tracks, or Objects contained within a Track.
* PUBLISH_NAMESPACE requests that Subscriptions under the namespace be sent
  to that Publisher. If a Subscription was sent to the replaying endpoint, it
  would fail because the endpoint cannot complete the handshake.

Some potential side effects of replay are:

* Publishing Objects that were previously published could cause those
  Objects to be distributed to active Subscriptions if the relays do
  not identify them as already having been published. This re-distribution could

>   also make them available in cache again after they previously had expired.

Author: ```suggestion
  also make them available in cache again after they previously expired.
```

Replays could increase load on the MOQT network. For relay to client
traffic, this is no worse than 0-RTT in HTTP/3, since the server is limited by
the amplification factor until address validation. However, it could cause
the relay to initiate new upstream Subscriptions. For a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE
that requested Subscriptions in the Namespace, sending that upstream could
cause the Relay to receive a number of new Subscriptions on the replaying
client's behalf.

Relays SHOULD implement rate-limiting or validation for 0-RTT requests
that trigger upstream subscriptions to mitigate resource exhaustion from

> replayed packets.

Author: Is this better?

```suggestion
Relays MAY defer initiating upstream subscriptions until the handshake is complete
or reject 0-RTT entirely to mitigate resource exhaustion from replayed packets.
```

Reviewer 2: Do you have a specific response code that a relay could use so that the client can know that this was something that can be retried?  Or is it always possible to retry a subscription?  Surely there are classes of rejection that are permanent and others that are temporary.

session's lifetime.  Doing so results in the session being closed as a
`PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

Prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message, it's unknown what extensions
a peer will support. Message Parameters requiring negotiation SHOULD NOT
be used prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message unless the application
requires the extension or the endpoint knows the peer supports the
extension. If an unsupported Message Parameter is used, the peer will be
unable to process it and the session will be terminated. See {{message-params}}.

### 0-RTT

QUIC supports 0-RTT ({{Section 2.3 of ?RFC8446}}), but WebTransport over QUIC
is not expected to use 0-RTT, because initializing a WebTransport session
uses CONNECT, which is not a safe method. {{?RFC8470}} describes the use of
0-RTT with HTTP in more detail. If 0-RTT is used with an existing or future
version of WebTransport, the following would apply to it as well as QUIC.

0-RTT is not forward secure, so MOQT users need to consider that when
deciding if 0-RTT is appropriate.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

requires the extension or the endpoint knows the peer supports the
extension. If an unsupported Message Parameter is used, the peer will be
unable to process it and the session will be terminated. See {message-params}.

### 0-RTT

QUIC supports 0-RTT ({{Section 2.3 of ?RFC8446}}), but Webtransport over QUIC
is not expected to use 0-RTT, because initializing a WebTransport session
uses CONNECT, which is not a safe method. {{?RFC8470}} describes the use of
0-RTT with HTTP in more detail. If 0-RTT is used with an existing or future
version of WebTransport, the following would apply to it as well as QUIC.

0-RTT is not forward secure, so MoQ users need to consider that when
deciding if 0-RTT is appropriate.

MoQ Messages and Objects as defined in this draft are safe to replay in most
circumstances.

* TRACK_STATUS gets the Largest Object and Track Properties, but does not
  change the state of a Track or any Object in the Track.
* SUBSCRIBE requests Objects be delivered, but does not change the Objects
  being requested.
* PUBLISH initiates a Subscription and Objects can be immediately sent to
  the Subscriber. Sending the same Objects multiple times does not change

>   the Track contents, because MoQ ignores duplicate Objects.

Author: ```suggestion
  the Subscriber. Processing the same Objects multiple times is
  idempotent, as the subscriber or relay can identify and discard
  duplicates based on the Group ID and Object ID.
```

session's lifetime.  Doing so results in the session being closed as a
`PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

Prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message, it's unknown what extensions
a peer will support. Message Parameters requiring negotiation SHOULD NOT
be used prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message unless the application
requires the extension or the endpoint knows the peer supports the
extension. If an unsupported Message Parameter is used, the peer will be
unable to process it and the session will be terminated. See {message-params}.

### 0-RTT

QUIC supports 0-RTT ({{Section 2.3 of ?RFC8446}}), but Webtransport over QUIC
is not expected to use 0-RTT, because initializing a WebTransport session
uses CONNECT, which is not a safe method. {{?RFC8470}} describes the use of
0-RTT with HTTP in more detail. If 0-RTT is used with an existing or future
version of WebTransport, the following would apply to it as well as QUIC.

0-RTT is not forward secure, so MoQ users need to consider that when
deciding if 0-RTT is appropriate.

> MoQ Messages and Objects as defined in this draft are safe to replay in most

Author: ```suggestion
0-RTT is not forward secure, so MoQT users need to consider that when
deciding if 0-RTT is appropriate.

MoQT Messages and Objects as defined in this draft are safe to replay in most
```

circumstances.

* TRACK_STATUS gets the Largest Object and Track Properties, but does not
  change the state of a Track or any Object in the Track.
* SUBSCRIBE requests Objects be delivered, but does not change the Objects
  being requested.
* PUBLISH initiates a Subscription and Objects can be immediately sent to
  the Subscriber. Processing the same Objects multiple times is
  idempotent, as the subscriber or relay can identify and discard
  duplicates based on the Group ID and Object ID.
* SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests a list of namespaces and the establishment
  of new subscriptions, but does not change the available Namespaces,
  Tracks, or Objects contained within a Track.
* PUBLISH_NAMESPACE requests that Subscriptions under the namespace be sent
  to that Publisher. If a Subscription was sent to the replaying endpoint, it
  would fail because the endpoint cannot complete the handshake.

Some potential side effects of replay are:

* Publishing Objects that were previously published could cause those
  Objects to be distributed to active Subscriptions if the relays do
  not identify them as already having been published.

> Replays could increase load on the MoQ network. For relay to client

Author: ```suggestion
Replays could increase load on the MoQT network. For relay to client
```

traffic, this is no worse than 0-RTT in HTTP/3, since it'd be limited by
the amplification factor until address validation. However, it could cause
the relay to initiate new upstream Subscriptions. For a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE
that requested Subscriptions in the Namespace, sending that upstream could
cause the Relay to receive a number of new Subscriptions on the replaying

> client's behalf.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
client's behalf.

Relays SHOULD implement rate-limiting or validation for 0-RTT requests that trigger upstream subscriptions to mitigate resource exhaustion from replayed packets.

```

  duplicates based on the Group ID and Object ID.
* SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests a list of namespaces and the establishment
  of new subscriptions, but does not change the available Namespaces,
  Tracks, or Objects contained within a Track.
* PUBLISH_NAMESPACE requests that Subscriptions under the namespace be sent
  to that Publisher. If a Subscription was sent to the replaying endpoint, it
  would fail because the endpoint cannot complete the handshake.

Some potential side effects of replay are:

* Publishing Objects that were previously published could cause those
  Objects to be distributed to active Subscriptions if the relays do
  not identify them as already having been published.

Replays could increase load on the MoQT network. For relay to client
traffic, this is no worse than 0-RTT in HTTP/3, since it'd be limited by
the amplification factor until address validation. However, it could cause
the relay to initiate new upstream Subscriptions. For a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE
that requested Subscriptions in the Namespace, sending that upstream could
cause the Relay to receive a number of new Subscriptions on the replaying
client's behalf.

> Relays SHOULD implement rate-limiting or validation for 0-RTT requests that trigger upstream subscriptions to mitigate resource exhaustion from replayed packets.

Author: ```suggestion
Relays SHOULD implement rate-limiting or validation for 0-RTT requests
that trigger upstream subscriptions to mitigate resource exhaustion from
replayed packets.
```

session's lifetime.  Doing so results in the session being closed as a
`PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

Prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message, it's unknown what extensions
a peer will support. Message Parameters requiring negotiation SHOULD NOT
be used prior to receiving the peer's SETUP message unless the application
requires the extension or the endpoint knows the peer supports the
extension. If an unsupported Message Parameter is used, the peer will be
unable to process it and the session will be terminated. See {{message-params}}.

### 0-RTT

QUIC supports 0-RTT ({{Section 2.3 of ?RFC8446}}), but WebTransport over QUIC
is not expected to use 0-RTT, because initializing a WebTransport session

> uses CONNECT, which is not a safe method. {{?RFC8470}} describes the use of

Reviewer 2: This introductory sentence is a bit weird.

I think that what you are saying is:

> QUIC 0-RTT provides the option for a client to initiate transactions immediately after attempting to establish a connection, without waiting for a response.

And:

> 0-RTT is only available to MOQT when using QUIC directly; a WebTransport session cannot be instantiated in the 0-RTT phase of the QUIC connection that it runs over, though it is possible to use WebTransport streams concurrent with WebTransport setup on an existing connection.

And then the RFC8470 business.

Author: Technically I could 0-RTT a WebTransport session if I declare my request as safe in the client library.  For example, there are cases clients do that today for gRPC requests, which are POST.  But I agree my effort to allude to that without saying it is making the text more awkward.

0-RTT with HTTP in more detail. If 0-RTT is used with an existing or future
version of WebTransport, the following would apply to it as well as QUIC.

> 0-RTT is not forward secure, so MoQT users need to consider that when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
0-RTT is not forward secure, so MOQT users need to consider that when
```

> 0-RTT is not forward secure, so MOQT users need to consider that when

Reviewer 3: I don't understand what forward secrecy has anything to do with the text of this section.

Author: I think I took that from HTTP/3 or the early data draft?  Should I remove this?

Reviewer 3: I don't see text like that in RFC 8470.  Let's just remove it?

Author: Removed

Reviewer 2: The main thing you likely want to focus on is replay risk, yeah.  Though I would want to retain a note about post-compromise security.  That is, 0-RTT data does not remain confidential and authenticated if the static secret used to protect is is compromised.  For that, I would stick a reference to RFC 8446 (bis) in.  But keep the emphasis on replay.

deciding if 0-RTT is appropriate.

> MoQT Messages and Objects as defined in this draft are safe to replay in most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MOQT Messages and Objects as defined in this draft are safe to replay in most
```

> circumstances.

Reviewer 2: In MOQT, is the only state that might be altered by a request on the server?  It might be worth noting that, because 0-RTT messages that commit resources of a client (I authorize a payment of $10 being the canonical one) are also implicated by replay.

From what I can see, this list seems fine, but I'm not read up on MOQT.  You should be extra careful to check that you are not making assumptions about what it means to deliver objects though.  In theory, HTTP GET doesn't have side effects, but it often does.  By the same token, HTTP POST is assumed to have effects, but that is not always the case, so it can be safe to send in 0-RTT if both parties understand what is going on (DoH being a good example of that).  In our analysis in RFC 8470, we had to be very precise in wording things because of that mismatch between expectations and reality.

* TRACK_STATUS gets the Largest Object and Track Properties, but does not
  change the state of a Track or any Object in the Track.
* SUBSCRIBE requests Objects be delivered, but does not change the Objects
  being requested.

> * PUBLISH initiates a Subscription and Objects can be immediately sent to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* PUBLISH initiates a Subscription. Objects can be immediately sent to
```

The "and" here reads poorly.  Probably more so if you are less familiar with MOQT.  Reword according to your preferences, of course.

  the Subscriber. Processing the same Objects multiple times is
  idempotent, as the subscriber or relay can identify and discard
  duplicates based on the Group ID and Object ID.
* SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests a list of namespaces and the establishment
  of new subscriptions, but does not change the available Namespaces,
  Tracks, or Objects contained within a Track.
* PUBLISH_NAMESPACE requests that Subscriptions under the namespace be sent
  to that Publisher. If a Subscription was sent to the replaying endpoint, it
  would fail because the endpoint cannot complete the handshake.

Some potential side effects of replay are:

* Publishing Objects that were previously published could cause those
  Objects to be distributed to active Subscriptions if the relays do

>   not identify them as already having been published.

Reviewer 2: As above, this is one of those examples of where server-side state is altered by a request.  If this happened in 0-RTT, followed by an action that reversed the decision, then a replay could undo that reversal.  That's an example of where a series of actions is not idempotent, even where each individual action is idempotent.  Again, focus on the state change that the 0-RTT triggers: if it is non-consequential, then it is OK to recommend that servers accept the request, but they will have to make their own decisions about what is non-consequential.

Author: You can't unpublish an Object, though it can time out from the cache, so this would make it temporarily available again.

> Replays could increase load on the MoQT network. For relay to client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replays could increase load on the MOQT network. For relay to client
```

> traffic, this is no worse than 0-RTT in HTTP/3, since it'd be limited by

Reviewer: 'it'd be' is a little colloquial

Author: ```suggestion
traffic, this is no worse than 0-RTT in HTTP/3, since the server is limited by
```

the amplification factor until address validation. However, it could cause
the relay to initiate new upstream Subscriptions. For a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE
that requested Subscriptions in the Namespace, sending that upstream could
cause the Relay to receive a number of new Subscriptions on the replaying
client's behalf.

Relays SHOULD implement rate-limiting or validation for 0-RTT requests
that trigger upstream subscriptions to mitigate resource exhaustion from

> replayed packets.

Reviewer 2: Is this it?

In RFC 8470, we recommended that servers do one of two things:

1. Accept the risk and process the request.
2. Defer processing and wait until the handshake is complete (this is unlikely to be feasible at scale, but it's worth noting that many handshakes complete and you can often commit less costly actions before making a final call).
3. Reject the request.

I strongly recommend that you provide a "try again" style of rejection into these things so that servers can make their own decisions about the risk associated with requests that appear in 0-RTT.

Author: Good point. I proposed a rewrite below
